[docs][joy-ui] Revise the CSS vars page (#39335)
mui/material-ui: docs/data/joy/customization/using-css-variables/using-css-variables.md

# Using CSS variables

<p class="description">Learn how to use CSS variables to customize Joy UI components.</p>

## Introduction

To use CSS variables, you must wrap your app with the `<CssVarsProvider />` utility.

```jsx
import { CssVarsProvider } from '@mui/joy/styles';

function App() {
  return <CssVarsProvider>...</CssVarsProvider>;
}
```

Then you can apply styles based on CSS variables using the `theme.vars.*` notation.
This notation is available to all styling APIs that Joy UI supports, including the `styled()` function and the `sx` prop.

## Styling APIs

Use the `theme.vars.*` notation with any styling APIs supported by Joy UI:

:::success

> Visit [the Approaches page](/joy-ui/customization/approaches/) to understand how to use the supported styling APIs by Joy UI to customize the components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visit [the Approaches page](/joy-ui/customization/approaches/) to understand how to use the supported styling APIs.
```

### Styling APIs

Use the `theme.vars` notation with any styling APIs supported by Joy UI:

#### styled function

```js
const Div = styled('div')(({ theme }) => ({
  // Outputs 'var(--joy-palette-primary-500)'
  color: theme.vars.palette.primary[500],
}));
```

#### sx prop

```jsx
// Outputs 'var(--joy-shadow-sm)'
<Chip sx={(theme) => ({ boxShadow: theme.vars.shadow.sm })} />
```

You can also use a short-hand syntax to resolve the values from the `theme.vars.*` the same way the example above does.

```js
<Chip
  sx={{
    border: '1px solid',

    // For color related properties, lookup from `theme.vars.palette`
    color: 'neutral.800', // 'var(--joy-palette-neutral-800)'
    borderColor: 'neutral.400', // 'var(--joy-palette-neutral-400)'

    // lookup from `theme.vars.shadow`
    shadow: 'sm', // 'var(--joy-shadow-sm)'

    // lookup from `theme.vars.fontSize`
    fontSize: 'sm', // 'var(--joy-fontSize-sm)'
  }}
/>
```

#### Themed components

```jsx
extendTheme({
  components: {
    JoyButton: {
      root: ({ theme }) => ({
        // Outputs 'var(--joy-fontFamily-display)'
        fontFamily: theme.vars.fontFamily.display,
      }),
    },
  },
});
```

#### useTheme hook

> missing

Reviewer 2: Done!

# Using CSS variables

<p class="description">Learn how to use CSS variables to customize Joy UI components.</p>

## Introduction

> To use CSS variables, you must wrap your app with the `<CSSVarsProvider />` utility.

Author: Good catch! I missed it 😄

```jsx
import { CssVarsProvider } from '@mui/joy/styles';

function App() {
  return <CssVarsProvider>...</CssVarsProvider>;
}
```

Then you can apply styles based on CSS variables using the `theme.vars.*` notation.
This notation is available to all styling APIs that Joy UI supports, including the `styled()` function and the `sx` prop.

## Styling APIs

Use the `theme.vars.*` notation with any styling APIs supported by Joy UI:

> ### styled function

Reviewer: Maybe we should links to the relevant docs for each of these sections? This page assumes that the reader knows what all of these are, which may not be the case.

Author: Added a success callout pointing to the Approaches page — what do you think?

(We might need to do a quick revision on that one, too, to ensure it covers all the styling APIs adequately, as well with demos for them... but for another PR!)

# Using CSS variables

<p class="description">Learn how to use CSS variables to customize Joy UI components.</p>

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: I think we could add another sentence or two providing more details about _what_ CSS variables are and _why_ you'd want to use them.

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: Another thought: is this header necessary? If we dropped "Introduction" and "Usage" from the header hierarchy here, we could bump up all of those h4s into h3s, and then they would get added to the TOC nav. It feels like everything on the page is technically about "usage."

Author: That makes sense! 🤙

Author: That makes sense! 🤙

> CSS variables are created by wrapping your app with the CssVarsProvider and using the `theme.vars` notation, allowing for an efficient customization experience.

Reviewer: We could elaborate more here as well, but maybe this text is better suited to the "Usage" section, and should be replaced with the "what" and the "why" of CSS vars in the introduction

```suggestion
To use CSS variables, you must wrap your app with the `<CSSVarsProvider />` utility.
Then you can apply styles based on CSS variables using the `theme.vars.*` notation.
This notation is available to all styling APIs that Joy UI supports, including the `styled()` function and the `sx` prop.
```

Author: Reshuffled things around a bit — let me know what you think!

```jsx
import { CssVarsProvider } from '@mui/joy/styles';

function App() {
  return <CssVarsProvider>...</CssVarsProvider>;
}
```

## Usage

### Styling APIs

> Use the `theme.vars` notation with any styling APIs supported by Joy UI:

Reviewer: I don't know if we have a preferred style for this, but I like adding `.*` to indicate that it's incomplete/open-ended.

```suggestion
Use the `theme.vars.*` notation with any styling APIs supported by Joy UI:
```

#### styled function

```js
const Div = styled('div')(({ theme }) => ({
  // Outputs 'var(--joy-palette-primary-500)'
  color: theme.vars.palette.primary[500],
}));
```

#### sx prop

```jsx
// Outputs 'var(--joy-shadow-sm)'
<Chip sx={(theme) => ({ boxShadow: theme.vars.shadow.sm })} />
```

> You can also use a short-hand syntax to resolve the values from the `theme.vars.*` the same way the example above does.

Reviewer: What does "the example above" refer to? Is it supposed to be the example below?

Author: It's referring to this snippet on the `sx` prop section: 

```
// Outputs 'var(--joy-shadow-sm)'
<Chip sx={(theme) => ({ boxShadow: theme.vars.shadow.sm })} />
```

Reviewer: ah ok, that makes sense

```js
<Chip
  sx={{
    border: '1px solid',

>     // For color related properties, lookup from `theme.vars.palette`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // For color properties, lookup from `theme.vars.palette`
```

    color: 'neutral.800', // 'var(--joy-palette-neutral-800)'
    borderColor: 'neutral.400', // 'var(--joy-palette-neutral-400)'

    // lookup from `theme.vars.shadow`
    shadow: 'sm', // 'var(--joy-shadow-sm)'

    // lookup from `theme.vars.fontSize`
    fontSize: 'sm', // 'var(--joy-fontSize-sm)'
  }}
/>
```

#### Themed components

```jsx
extendTheme({
  components: {
    JoyButton: {
      root: ({ theme }) => ({
        // Outputs 'var(--joy-fontFamily-display)'
        fontFamily: theme.vars.fontFamily.display,
      }),
    },
  },
});
```

#### useTheme hook

> Note that the `useTheme` hook should be used in components wrapped by the `CssVarsProvider` component.

Reviewer: Isn't this always the case? My understanding is that this note applies equally to everything on the page.

:::

### Adjust color opacity

> Use the automatically generated opacity channel tokens (`mainChannel`, `lightChannel` and `darkChannel`), together with the `rgba` color notation, to adjust color opacity in all [available palettes](/joy-ui/customization/theme-colors/#default-color-tokens/) in Joy UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the automatically generated opacity channel tokens (`mainChannel`, `lightChannel` and `darkChannel`), together with the `rgba` color notation, to adjust color opacity in all [available palettes](/joy-ui/customization/theme-colors/#default-color-tokens) in Joy UI.
```

After `#`, there should be no `/`

```js
const Div = styled('div')(({ theme }) => ({
  backgroundColor: `rgba(${theme.vars.palette.primary.mainChannel} / 0.12)`,
}));
```

:::warning
The format of the channel tokens uses a space as a separator (e.g., `61 131 246`), which means you have to use `/` to combine the channel token with an opacity value.

```js
`rgba(${theme.vars.palette.primary.mainChannel} / 0.12)`, ✅ correct
`rgba(${theme.vars.palette.primary.mainChannel}, 0.12)`, 🚫 incorrect
```

:::

### Custom prefixes

Every Joy UI CSS variable is prefixed with `joy` by default.

> To change it, use the `cssVarsPrefix` property inside an `extendTheme` function within the CssVarsProvider component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To change it, use the `cssVarPrefix` property inside an `extendTheme` function within the CssVarsProvider component.
```

without 's'

You can't use `theme.vars` to create an inset shadow because the value refers to the CSS variable, not the actual shadow.

- `theme.vars.shadow.sm` returns `'var(--joy-shadow-sm)'`
- `theme.shadow.sm` returns `'var(--joy-shadowRing), 0 1px 2px 0 rgba(var(--joy-shadowChannel) / 0.2)'`

:::

### Adjust color opacity

Use the automatically generated opacity channel tokens (`mainChannel`, `lightChannel` and `darkChannel`), together with the `rgba` color notation, to adjust color opacity in all [available palettes](/joy-ui/customization/theme-colors/#default-color-tokens) in Joy UI.

```js
const Div = styled('div')(({ theme }) => ({
  backgroundColor: `rgba(${theme.vars.palette.primary.mainChannel} / 0.2)`,
}));
```

:::warning
The format of the channel tokens uses a space as a separator (e.g., `61 131 246`), which means you have to use `/` to combine the channel token with an opacity value.

```js
`rgba(${theme.vars.palette.primary.mainChannel} / 0.2)`, //  ✅ correct
`rgba(${theme.vars.palette.primary.mainChannel}, 0.2)`, // 🚫 incorrect
```

:::

### Custom prefixes

Every Joy UI CSS variable is prefixed with `joy` by default.

> To change it, use the `cssVarPrefix` property inside an `extendTheme` function within the CssVarsProvider component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To change this prefix, use the `cssVarPrefix` property inside an `extendTheme` function on the `<CssVarsProvider />` component.
```

}
```

The generated CSS variables will then be:

```diff
- --joy-fontSize-md: 1rem;
+ --company-fontSize-md: 1rem;
```

### Removing the default prefix

> Use an empty value (`""`) in the `cssVarsPrefix` property to remove the default `joy` prefix from the generated CSS variables:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use an empty value (`""`) in the `cssVarPrefix` property to remove the default `joy` prefix from the generated CSS variables:
```

```jsx
import { CssVarsProvider, extendTheme } from '@mui/joy/styles';

function App() {
  return (

>     <CssVarsProvider theme={extendTheme({ cssVarPrefix: '""' })}>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <CssVarsProvider theme={extendTheme({ cssVarPrefix: '' })}>
```
